(music)
Samuels: I do think that the Olmstead decision ushered in
a new understanding of the damage done to people with disabilities
by placing them in these segregated settings.
And that was something that, I think, people hadn't focused on previously.
Since that time, we've really seen
a growth in level of attention and certainly at the Justice Department
it is a high priority of ours to ensure that
we enforce the dictates of Olmstead to the maximum extent.
(music)
(music change)
Narrator: Mallori is a very zealous and charismatic woman.
She's very independant and loves to be out in the community.
Mallori: It's a beautiful day to be at the zoo.
Man: She's a friendly, happy person.
(music)
Mallori: I volunteer on Mondays at the Y
and Fridays at the Animal Protective Association.
Shelter Worker: Typically when she shows up, she'll either be doing just a customary
sort of shredding, some clerical work, some moving things around.
Her most important task is that she spends a lot of time in our cat room socializing cats.
Mallori: Oh my God! Total lap kitty. My kind of kitty!
I love animals. They're loving and playful.
Shelter Worker: She shows up, she's happy to see everybody.
She's willing to do just about anything you'll give her.
If it's something she finds challenging, she'll still try and do it.
(music)
(music change)
Lynn Seagle: I met Lucinda in a large institution in Lynchburg.
And I'm not even sure if she ever really had an official diagnosis
of a developmental disability. Although she was raised by deaf parents.
And when I first saw her there, she looked at me and she said: "Can I go... with you?"
She now lives in her own apartment right next door to her best friend, Charlotte.
Avid gardener. Delightful... delightful woman.
I can't imagine that she would have spent her days... in that institution.
(music)
Narrator: Robin had to leave her home when her physical condition became
too much to manage.
She moved to a nursing home but it wasn't where she wanted to live.
Robin: I have mental illness and emotional illness.
When I was in the nursing home, a day never went by that I wouldn't quit crying.
Because it is, I'm sorry, It's just depressing.
Because you just think... nursing home is the final step in your life. You know?
Home Health Aide: To see somebody, like Robin, who has already been
in the nursing home and then to help her get home, which was her desire,
and to see how well she's doing now.
She's got her nails painted.
She just seems like a very happy, healthy lady.
Robin: Yeah.
Robin: That's just another reason it's nice to be home.
Because I love my flowers and plants.
(music)
Arlene Korab: The fact that soldiers are coming back
with severe brain injuries. And they have been misdiagnosed as well.
It's very hard to tell the difference between a brain injury and post-traumatic stress syndrome.
But once it is diagnosed and they have realized what the difference is,
they're telling us 60% of all the veterans coming back with injuries
have some form of brain injury and sent back to their communities.
Where they're going home, and their families are saying "What is wrong here? What's going on?"
But once they're in the community, there are community-based services that they're going to
need and they don't know what those services are. Many people don't realize
that they are eligible for things like Social Security and Medicaid.
They just don't know that because they've never been in that position and they're living
without income. There are some things in life that we all need. We all need friends.
We all need a place to go. We all need something to do with our day.
(music)
Chase: Hi. My name is Chase Thorenson. I've been living on my own for two years.
I came from a rehabilitation center not knowing
that I could receive the same services I do now living in my own home.
My life is good because I can come and go as I please.
I have two jobs.
And lastly I want you guys to know that I am living my dream.
(music)
Eve Hill: The history of these programs, segregated progams were seen as the model.
And as the only thing people with disabilities would be capable of.
That change has happened over time. And more and more
research and expertise and policies and models have come up
that show that we know better now. That that is not the model.
(music)